Tutorial 06: Replace DPR with EmbeddingRetriever (#2910)
deepset-ai/haystack: docs/_src/tutorials/tutorials/6.md

**Pros**: Simple, fast, well explainable

**Cons**: Relies on exact keyword matches between query and text

#### Dense

> These retrievers use neural network models to create "dense" embedding vectors. Within this family there are two different approaches:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These retrievers use neural network models to create "dense" embedding vectors. Within this family, there are two different approaches:
```
```suggestion
These retrievers use neural network models to create "dense" embedding vectors. Within this family there are two different approaches:
```

> a) Single encoder: Use a **single model** to embed both query and passage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a) Single encoder: Use a **single model** to embed both the query and the passage.
```

> b) Dual-encoder: Use **two models**, one to embed the query and one to embed the passage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
b) Dual-encoder: Use **two models**, one to embed the query and one to embed the passage.
```

**Examples**: REALM, DPR, Sentence-Transformers

> **Pros**: Captures semantic similarity instead of "word matches" (e.g. synonyms, related topics ...)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Pros**: Captures semantic similarity instead of "word matches" (for example, synonyms, related topics).
```

> **Cons**: Computationally more heavy to use, initial training of model (though this is less of an issue nowadays as we can grab and use one of the many pre-trained models available i.e. we don't usually need to train the model).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Cons**: Computationally more heavy to use, initial training of the model (though this is less of an issue nowadays as many pre-trained models are available and most of the time, it's not needed to train the model).
```

### Embedding Retrieval

> In this Tutorial, we use an `EmbeddingRetriever` with a style of models called [Sentence Transformers](https://www.sbert.net/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this Tutorial, we use an `EmbeddingRetriever` with [Sentence Transformers](https://www.sbert.net/index.html) models.
```

These models are trained to embed similar sentences close to each other in a shared embedding space.

Some models have been fine-tuned on massive Information Retrieval data and can be used to retrieve documents based on a short query (for example, `multi-qa-mpnet-base-dot-v1`). There are others that are more suited to semantic similarity tasks where you are trying to find the most similar documents to a given document (for example, `all-mpnet-base-v2`). There are even models that are multilingual (for example, `paraphrase-multilingual-mpnet-base-v2`). For a good overview of different models with their evaluation metrics, see the [Pretrained Models](https://www.sbert.net/docs/pretrained_models.html#) in the Sentence Transformers documentation.

*Use this* [link](https://colab.research.google.com/github/deepset-ai/haystack/blob/master/tutorials/Tutorial6_Better_Retrieval_via_Embedding_Retrieval.ipynb) *to open the notebook in Google Colab.*

> ### Prepare environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prepare the Environment
```

> #### Colab: Enable the GPU runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Colab: Enable the GPU Runtime
```

#### Retriever

> **Here:** We use a `EmbeddingRetriever`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Here:** We use an `EmbeddingRetriever`.
```

**Alternatives:**

> - `BM25Retriever`with custom queries (e.g. boosting) and filters

Reviewer 2: Please add a space between `BM25Retriever` and `with`

> - `BM25Retriever` with custom queries (e.g. boosting) and filters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `BM25Retriever` with custom queries (for example, boosting) and filters
```

- `DensePassageRetriever` which uses two encoder models, one to embed the query and one to embed the passage, and then compares the embedding for retrieval
- `TfidfRetriever` in combination with a SQL or InMemory Document store for simple prototyping and debugging

```python
from haystack.nodes import EmbeddingRetriever

retriever = EmbeddingRetriever(
    document_store=document_store,
    embedding_model="sentence-transformers/multi-qa-mpnet-base-dot-v1",
    model_format="sentence_transformers",
)
# Important:

> # Now that after we have the retriever initialized, we need to call update_embeddings() to iterate over all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Now that we initialized the Retriever, we need to call update_embeddings() to iterate over all
```

# previously indexed documents and update their embedding representation.

> # While this can be a time consuming operation (depending on corpus size), it only needs to be done once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# While this can be a time consuming operation (depending on the corpus size), it only needs to be done once.
```

> # At query time, we only need to embed the query and compare it the existing doc embeddings which is very fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# At query time, we only need to embed the query and compare it to the existing document embeddings, which is very fast.
```
```suggestion
# At query time, we only need to embed the query and compare it the existing doc embeddings which is very fast.
```

This [Haystack](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/) notebook was made with love by [deepset](https://deepset.ai/) in Berlin, Germany

> We bring NLP to the industry via open source!

Reviewer 2: I think removing the tab here causes the next line `Our focus:` to be put on the same line as `We bring ...`, which I don't think is intended. Could you add a space between the lines or add back the tab?

Author: I added a space between the lines. The removal was from `trailing-whitespace` pre-commit hook. So couldn't put back the tab without disabling it.
